# Running tests
This document goes over the basic steps to create tests for the components included in your extension

## Data Warehouse configuration

For running the `test` and `capture` scripts, you need to configure the access to the data warehouse where your extension is supposed to run. To do so, rename the `.env.template` file in the root of the repository to `.env` and edit it with the appropriate values for each provider (BigQuery or Snowflake). 

For BigQuery, we only need to specify the project and dataset where the tests will run. 
```
BQ_TEST_PROJECT=
BQ_TEST_DATASET=
```
Check [this section](./tooling.md#authentication-with-the-data-warehouse) to ensure you have authenticated correctly with BigQuery.

For Snowflake, we also need to set credentials to authenticate in the `.env` file.
```
SF_ACCOUNT=
SF_TEST_DATABASE=
SF_TEST_SCHEMA=
SF_USER=
SF_PASSWORD=
```

## Files and folder structure

The content of the [`/components/<component_name>/test/`](../components/template/test/) is as follows: 
``` 
test/
    ├── test.json
    ├── table1.ndjson
    └── fixtures/
        ├── 1.json
        └── 2.json
```
### `test.json`
Contains an array with the definition of each test, specifying the `id` of each test and the values for each input: 
```json
[
    {
        "id": 1,
        "inputs": {
            "input_table": "table1",
            "value": "test"
        }
    },
    {
        "id": 2,
        "inputs": {
            "input_table": "table1",
            "value": "test2"
        }
    }
]
```
### `table1.ndjson`
An NDJSON file that contains the data to be used in the test. It can have any arbitrary name, but make sure it's correctly referenced in `input_table` in your `test.json` file. For example: 

```json
{"id":1,"name":"Alice"}
{"id":2,"name":"Bob"}
{"id":3,"name":"Carol"}
```
### `fixtures/<id>.json`

The fixture files contain the expected result for each test defined in `test.json`. For example, for our test `1` we would have a `1.json` file with this content: 
```json
{
  "output_table": [
    {
      "name": "Bob",
      "id": 2,
      "fixed_value_col": "test"
    },
    {
      "name": "Carol",
      "id": 3,
      "fixed_value_col": "test"
    },
    {
      "name": "Alice",
      "id": 1,
      "fixed_value_col": "test"
    }
  ]
}
```

When developing new components, the `fixture` folder and its content will be automatically generated by running the `capture` command: 

```bash
$ python carto_extension.py capture
```

## Setup
Setup the elements in the `test` folder to define how the test should be run to verify that the component is correctly working. 
Checkout [this section](./anatomy_of_an_extension.md#test) to understand which files are necessary to define the tests. 

Run the `capture` script to create the test fixtures from the results of running your components in the corresponding datawarehouse.
```bash
$ python carto_extension.py capture
```
This command will generate fixture files in the `fixtures` folder.
Check the created files to ensure that the output is as expected. 

From that point, you can now run the `test` script to run tests and check if they match the captured outputs, whenever you change the implementation of any of the components.
```bash
$ python carto_extension.py test
```

## CI configuration

This template includes a GitHub workflow to run the extension test suite when new changes are pushed to the repository (provided that the `capture` script has been run and test fixtures have been captured). 

GitHub secrets must be configured in order to have the workflow correctly running. Check the [`.github/.workflow/CI_tests.yml`](../.github/.workflow/CI_tests.yml) file for more information.